---
layout: post
title: Stress in Research. Part III&#58 The Trouble about Freedom
author: Charles Sutton
tags:
- advice
- stress in research
---

*The third post in what is becoming an increasingly long
series on [stress in research]({{ "stress%20in%20research" | tag_url | relative_url }}).*

I joked before that there's no reason researchers should feel stress:
how stressful can a job be if you're not expected to roll in to work until 10
o'clock in the morning? But more seriously, this
flexibility is itself a source of stress.

Academics don't really have bosses, despite what our
senior leadership sometimes seem to think. We do have a head
of department, of course, but the relationship isn't
like having a supervisor. I don't have weekly meetings
with my department head to report my progress on my current
projects. And I would *never* go to my head of department and say I've got too much to do, can she tell me
how I should prioritize my workload so that I focus on tasks
that are most important to the University.
The very idea is laughable.

Instead of having a boss, we have [sources of work](http://www.pgbovine.net/why-academics-feel-overworked.htm). Students from our own university and around the world ask us if we
can supervise their research projects. We
review and comment on reports from our own students.
We are asked to evaluate finished PhD theses from students
at other universities, in our own country
and worldwide.
 Funding agencies from our country and others ask
us to review proposals for multi-million pound research projects.
Representatives from the government ask us
to discuss connections with problems of national interest.
We organize workshops and conferences.
We meet researchers in other universities and governments
to learn about their work and explore potential collaborations.
The great thing about the blog I just linked to
--- it is actually called [why academics feel overworked](http://www.pgbovine.net/why-academics-feel-overworked.htm) --- is that it tries to make a complete
list of where academic work comes from.
My list just above is incomplete
because I'm only mentioning things that I can remember
happening in the past week. (And this, with me
 on sabbatical;
I'm not teaching this year.)
All of these sources of work are people who are asking
politely for our help on important work of their own.
None of these sources of work know about each other.

To be successful, of course it is important to learn to say "no", and to learn to say "no" often.
There are tricks about how to say "no" better, in a way
that helps the person who have asked. Many other blogs
talk about that, so I won't go further now.
It's enough to say that even if you say "no" a lot,
you will still have a lot to do.

Instead, I want to talk about flexibility.
It's no surprise that having a lot to do creates stress.
But having the flexibility to choose what to do
also creates stress.
The problem is that flexibility creates guilt.
Suppose I have tasks A, B, C, and D to do --- too many --- and
my boss instructs me to prioritize C, even though I think A
is more important. I might be annoyed or dismayed
by a poor decision being made, but I'm not *responsible*
for the poor decision.

When *I* prioritize, I *am* responsible.
When I choose to do one thing, I'm keenly aware
that there are many other things that I could be doing,
behind each a person who would like a few minutes
(or a few hours) of my help. For every thing I choose to do,
there are other people that I feel like I am letting down.
I am never quite
sure if the thing I have chosen to do is the right one.
Sometimes I'm quite sure that the thing that I'm doing
is *not* the most important, but maybe simply the most
important that I have enough energy for.

Why is the flexibility necessary?
Why couldn't academic work and research work be managed
more directly, like other types of work?
Our situation is not as unusual as it may seem ---
in any career, the more senior you become, the more
you are expected to set the agenda rather than follow an
agenda that is given to you. In academia and research specifically, there are
two forces that mandate flexibility for good work.

The first: If you do not have freedom to prioritize,
you do not have intellectual freedom, because part of intellectual
freedom is deciding what to think about.

The second: The job
of a researcher is about creating positive externalities.
Our work is to perpetuate and create a large portion
of human knowledge. When we succeed, the value of our work is enjoyed
by society as a whole, rather than the institution
that employs us. This is why the idea of going to my department
head for advice on prioritizing is so laughable.
We cannot ask the institution what is most valuable, because so much of the
value that we create does not return to the institution.
You become an academic because you believe the specialized
knowledge that fascinates you has, in some small sense,
importance to society as a whole. Another responsibility,
and another stressor!
