---
layout: post
title: Stress in Research. Part V&#58 If you really are an Impostor, then it's not a Syndrome
author: Charles Sutton
tags:
- advice
- stress in research
---

> As you know, there isn’t really any solution to self-doubt. In the end,
> you just have to write and doubt simultaneously.  
> --- Zadie Smith

*The final post of a series on
[stress in research]({{ "stress%20in%20research" | tag_url | relative_url }}).*

A nice way to end this series would be to talk about [impostor syndrome](http://phdcomics.com/comics/archive.php?comicid=1973),
but I'm the wrong
person to write that blog, because I don't think that I've ever literally
felt like an impostor. My self-doubt comes out in a different way.

I'll need to get a bit more personal, but an important warning first.
If you are currently serving on a committee that is considering whether to offer
me a new job, promotion, prize, or award, please can you stop reading now.
Thank you.

Now, as I said, my self-doubt comes out in a much simpler way.
I am secretly convinced that I am not good enough.
Not good enough for what? you ask. Anything, really.

We have already discussed how the
[Tournament of Research]({% post_url 2018-03-03-tournament-axe %})
is public. So I can see the accomplishments of those who have surpassed me
in the Tournament, and secretly doubt whether I am good enough to compete.

I can see how quickly the field is moving, and how many new ideas
are being introduced every few weeks, and secretly doubt
whether I am good enough to keep up.

I can see the pressing but fascinating problems that our research
field is facing. I doubt whether I am clever enough to create new ideas
that are subtle enough to solve these tricky problems.

These all amount to the same thing.
I am secretly convinced that I am not good
enough to create the kind of work that I would like to create.

Please understand that I will be all right. Please do not feel that you need to talk me up, tell me that
I'm being too self-critical, that I am a fine researcher, and that
you have always liked my papers.
Actually I'll take the last part back: You're more than welcome to
tell me how much you like my papers.
Flattery will get you nowhere, but it will make me feel better.

The reason that I will be all right is that none of these dark thoughts matter.
I am inadequate, I am not good enough, but it does not matter.
It does not matter because all the doubts, all those dark thoughts, are self centered claptrap,
exercises in destructive solipsism.  The doubts are all about me,
but when it comes to work, how I feel is unimportant.

*It does not matter how good I am.*

As long as I love the work
that I do, and people are willing to pay me to do it,

As long as I can keep learning things about my work,
as long as I learn from my students, colleagues, and collaborators,
at the same time that they seem to be learning from me,

As long as I can see new directions for my work,
to expand my knowledge and perhaps others' as well,

As long as there is a chance, even a slim one, that I can create something
that will change the way people think, or in a small way, improve
the way the world works,

As long as I can *do* all this, it does not matter how good I *am*.
As long as there remains much to do,
I am going to try to do it, whether I am good enough or not.

Even if I reach the end of my career, and never do something that ever fully
matches my ambitions, my work will have accomplished
something, even if indirectly and in a small way.
I have had the privilege to participate in the worldwide, centuries-long conversation
of the community of scholars. And this larger conversation
has made a difference, I am sure, even if my own part has been small.
I have trained people who have gone on to good careers.
I have been part of the life of the university, preserving, growing, and sharing
knowledge. That is
 enough to make my professional life worthwhile, even after all the papers that I've written have faded into obscurity.

And that's how I deal with self doubt.
